---
ID: 31
post_title: Searoom
author: Austin Segrest
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: >
  https://shenandoahliterary.org/672/2018/04/12/searoom/
published: true
post_date: 2018-04-12 20:23:52
---
Mr. Warham’s first sea storm I sat with him in his chambers. We read together the Psalm about them that go down to the sea in ships. He was far he said, looking green, from having list to sleep with Jonah. I said it seldom falls out that a ship perisheth at storm if it have sea room. So he began to call his study his sea room. I told him about different names for gales— the dainty loom that was gentle and the fair frum as fit as a wind could blow. Becalmed the next morning, I said your prayers were heard. He said aye that sometimes it was all or nothing with the Lord, that when it rained it poured. I said aye we’re better off now walking the plain and even meadow, had we the feet for it. In a fog we fumbled about like a blind man he said, as we drummed for *The* *Lion **Whelp* and sounded with a line above a hundred fathom and found not bottom. He likened whales’ backs to little isles and said that islands in a fog were like to whales. And what’s a ship but an island, and isn’t it true we’re riding on the backs of whales ourselves, or else in their bellies? Pouring off water, the flukes of right whales rose like angels as they dove. Behold, they mount up to the heaven said the Reverend. They go down again to the depths. He thought the bladderwrack knit yellow above the bank were gillyflowers gleaned from the low meadows of New Jerusalem. Everything touched by his words was renewed. I hadn’t the heart to tell him.