---
ID: 39
post_title: Renewal
author: Al Maginnes
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: >
  https://shenandoahliterary.org/672/2018/04/13/renewal/
published: true
post_date: 2018-04-13 18:07:50
---
We are driving through our laments for what this town has become, almost lost though we turn routes so familiar I hardly need to steer. The clubs gutted to build shops and chain restaurants, the all-night diner where I once drank coffee and watched the world shrink into light a condo now, the bowling alley beside campus a Target where students can buy gym shorts and toilet paper, all these lead to a recital of what stood in  each non-existent building and remade space. Without speaking, we are steering out of town, along a two-lane road still robed in shade, trees pressed close to the road’s blunt shoulder, lower limbs bend groundward like animals come to drink at an oasis. Then the road widens and light splashes the asphalt, the wall of trees broken to reveal a cut clear, still littered with tree trunks lying askew, broken limbs dangling, casualties of the ongoing battle between space and commerce. And beyond, houses, all twinned in their sameness. I slow the car. No evidence anyone lives here. No one mowing or pulling weeds from beds uniformly mulched in pine bark. No kids shooting baskets or riding bikes. My brother and his ex- dwelled for a while on a similar street. I had to count doors to find their place. The fourth one on the left. Or maybe the sixth. When I moved here, this road was barely paved, a path through trees, its few houses hidden by pin oak and pines. A good place to lead an invisible life. Now, slashes of orange paint color the ground, sign that this road is due to be widened, repaved. A decade ago, when our daughter would only nap in the car, I would drive this road and a maze of others, circling the satellite towns of the county before the bosses began building glass towers that shine like new needles, even at might. Ground is broken, then come carpenters, masons, crane operators, craftsmen who will never walk the rich carpets that will fill halls that exist only on paper now or “take a meeting” around tables as big as a front porch. Then come computer jocks, software manipulators with their needs for Thai food, bike lanes, fair trade coffee. Now restaurants can charge eighteen bucks for an appetizer. The bar where I got drunk for the last time is a lot loaded with earth movers now. Past the colony of still-life houses, we see a mailbox, its top half crowned by the dome of a skull, the bottom adorned by jawbone, so opening the mailbox offers the illusion of a skull yawning for reasons, both good and evil. In the side yard, a windmill, not built of angle iron, curved blades dicing the wind, but something from a book a child reads, built of wood, its tiny windows leaded into diamond shapes. I’d call it life-sized, but how many in recent years have seen such a thing? Let’s say it was large enough for its job. Which, right now, is pulling our attention from the road as we slow and then pull over, the car slanted on a shallow ditch bank, our bodies still as the street we just passed. No matter how motionless our bones, time continues its slow walk forward, stubborn as a morning runner who knows the limits of his aging legs but keeps his dogged pace. Time will roll over all our wishes for the past to hold. We need to breathe deeply enough to appreciate the allotment of days we treat like the abandoned houses of our youth, places to be occupied, then destroyed. Denied a last drink, I stood outside the loud bar, emptied, feeling the start that would change. And keep changing. If this was a poem, if I was a wiser man, I’d find some explanation for what it all means, lessons from a self-created Virgil or just myself in the guise of a man almost whole. But I’m just a man sitting beside his wife, staring at something I’ll never have the patience or skill to make. Maybe once I would have bent close enough to draw a brush over each plane of wood, coloring each ne to contrast its neighbors, each an irreplaceable part of the whole. The lie bosses tell workers until they falter. But the windmill, with its ability to snare the eye echoes a more cautious time, when painting a structure or sanding a piece of wood correctly meant something. While we stare, the eyes in the skull flash red, little hazard lights, a caution that someone is watching, pulling us from what thickens in the capsule of our car: how easily we have dreamed ourselves into this place, a paradise artificial as the new structures we curse but can’t stop from coming. We drive away, accelerating back into our lives, returning to our porch where we see cranes above the trees, busy at the rebuilding there is no end of.